Discernment is the ability to assess the usefulness of AI outputs and behavior.
Fluent language is not proof.
A result can be coherent, complete-looking, and still be wrong, irrelevant, or unsafe for the situation.
Evaluate at three levels.
First, does the artifact answer the actual task?
Second, are important claims supported by reliable evidence?
Third, does the result fit the audience, constraints, and consequence of use?
Passing one level does not guarantee the others.
Inspect assumptions, omissions, and confidence boundaries.
Ask what would make the conclusion false, which source supports the key claim, and which part is an inference.
A useful answer should make important uncertainty easier to see, not easier to ignore.
Create contrast when judgment is difficult.
Request two approaches with explicit tradeoffs, test the result against an example it may fail on, or compare the output with a primary source.
Evaluation improves when there is something concrete to discriminate between.
For a research brief, do not grade the number of links.
Check whether the sources are primary, whether the dates fit the question, whether quoted evidence supports the conclusion, and whether unresolved uncertainty is named.
A confident summary without that chain is not ready.
The common failure is accepting the first smooth answer.
Speed creates a false stopping signal.
Pause where the decision is expensive, where a claim changes action, or where the artifact will be published, sent, merged, purchased, or used to judge another person.
First, judge task fit before judging presentation quality.
Second, separate evidence, inference, and unresolved uncertainty.
Third, add friction where an error would change a real decision.